Let's recap what we've learnt about solving
the inverse Kinematic problem for particular
robot arms. So far we've looked at the analytic
solution and that involved us creating a model
of the robot's joints and links. We write
down the equations for the forward kinematics
of the robot arm and that's relatively a straightforward
thing to do.
Next comes the hard part, where we need to
write down a lot of equations in attempt to
solve for the unknown joint variables and
that requires some human insight. Often when
you're trying to do this, you'll find yourself
going down some blind alleys before you come
back out and determine the right way to get
to the solution.
This process can be automated, using a computer
algebra package; you can write software that
will solve the inverse kinematics for certain
classes of robot arms. The great advantage
of the analytic solution is that it explicitly
shows the multiple configurations that the
robot arm can be in. So for our two link manipulator,
we showed two configurations with the middle
joint either below the diagonal line or above
the diagonal line.
For the Puma 560 robot, we showed configurations
where it's like a left handed person or a
right handed person and so on. The multiple
configurations come out explicitly when you
solve the analytic equations.
Another advantage of the analytic solution
is you end up writing expressions for the
joint angles in terms of the end effector
pose and they are quite compact and that means
that they are very fast to execute.
The problem becomes increasingly difficult
as the number of joints in the robot increases.
In an earlier section we derived the solution
for a simple two joint robot and already that
took quite a number of slides in order to
come up with the solution. What comes to our
rescue is that over many decades, smart people
have determined the inverse kinematic solutions
for particular robots or for particular classes
of robots, so they've done the hard work of
deriving the solutions and these have been
published in the literature.
So if you've got a particular robot and you're
looking for a solution, go and hit up the
literature and see if somebody has already
solved this problem for you.
When you're trying to determine the inverse
kinematics for a six degree of freedom robot,
it's really, really useful to have what's
called a "Spherical Wrist." Now a spherical
wrist is one in which the three wrist joint
axes all intersect at a common point, as shown
in this sketch here. Almost all industrial
robots have a spherical wrist. It's quite
a complex mechanism but it leads to great
simplicity when it comes to determining the
inverse kinematics of the robot.
In fact what it does is allow us to partition
the problem into two. It allows us to solve
for the position of the robot’s end effector,
the XYZ co-ordinate and then separately to
solve for the orientation of the robot's end
effector, that is the orientation that could
be expressed in terms roll, pitch, yaw angles
or in terms of Euler angles. But what happens
if it's not possible to determine the analytic
solution?
Perhaps the robot doesn't have a spherical
wrist or what if it's just too hard to figure
out or you can't be bothered to go through
the pages of algebra required to determine
the solution? Well there is an alternative
and that is to find a numerical solution to
the problem. We can always determine the forward
kinematics of a robot, that's relatively straight
forward to do as we showed in the previous
lecture. If we know the desired pose of our
robot, which I'm going to call Ksi star, then
all we have to do is adjust the joint angles
until the pose given to us by the forward
kinematics Ksi equals the desired value Ksi
star. So you could think of it perhaps as
having a large number of dials, each dial
represents a particular joint angle and I’m
just going to adjust all of those dials until
the robot's end effector pose equals the pose
that I want. A more formal way of describing
a problem like this is to represent it as
an optimization problem.
What I want to do is minimize the relative
pose which is given by the forward kinematics
of the robot compounded with the inverse of
the desired pose and I want to know the joint
angles that cause this minimum.
We've mostly talked about serial linked robots
and these are robots formed by a chain of
links, starting at the base of the robot we
have a link, that link holds up the second
link, which holds up the third link and so on.
An alternative structure for a robot is what's
called a parallel link robot and that's shown
here on the right. They have the advantage
that all the motors are placed in the base.
This has advantages over a serial link robot
where each motor has to hold up not only the
next link but also the motor that drives the
link beyond that.
Parallel link robots are also very, very ridged
and they're capable of very high speed motion.
They're used for high speed, very precise,
pick and place operations. So for a serial
link robot, the kinematics - the forward kinematics
is very easy to determine, very easy to write
down. However for a parallel link robot, the
forward kinematics is very, very complex and
an analytical form may not even exist. For
a serial link robot, the inverse kinematics
is typically complex and analytic form may
not exist. However for most parallel link
robots, the inverse kinematics is actually
very easy to determine and an analytic form
always exists. So there is some complementarity
between serial and parallel link robots; one
has an easy forward kinematics, the other
has an easy inverse kinematics.